Control catalog Concepts page updates (#1295)
usnistgov/OSCAL: docs/content/concepts/layer/control/catalog/_index.md

## Key Concepts

> OSCAL catalogs define sets of *related*, *complementary* controls. The primary use of the catalog model is to represent a comprehensive collection of controls from which an organization can create a *baseline*, by means of control selection and tailoring. A trusted machine-readable representation of a canonical control set such as NIST SP 800-53 is a significant (and arguably indispensable) asset for any organization tasked with understanding and implementing it; the OSCAL catalog model enables this by providing a common set of rules for encoding this catalog (control set), like others, thereby promoting interoperability and leveraging commodity tools. In addition, the catalog model provides a convenient representation of the tailored selection of controls, with their tailoring in place, which results when an OSCAL **profile** (which represents a set of selections and modifications of controls from catalogs, in abstracted form) is *resolved* against the catalog(s) it imports: as a "tailored control selection" (baseline) ready for display or further processing.

Reviewer: Suggestions:
1)"OSCAL catalog model is suitable for the representation, in a machine-readable format, of control catalogs defined as sets of ... "
2) I suggest we avoid categorizing the controls as *related* or *complementary* to not limit the use of the OSCAL model. Some controls could be *related* and others could be *complementary* but totally disjoined controls can also be represented. 
3) I suggest describing the subset of controls that can be selected as *profile* to link the information already to the OSCAL **profile** model, and add that such subsets are also referred to as *baselines*. NOTE: the term *baseline8 is only used in association with  800-53. We want to describe OSCAL to the entire world not only to the US federal community.

Reviewer: I agree. I will continue to review the PR, between meetings, and will provide additional comments (when necessary). If you want to discuss my comments once I will be done, we can have a meeting.

## Key Concepts

> OSCAL catalogs define organized sets of controls. The primary use of the catalog model is to represent a comprehensive collection of controls from which an organization can create a *baseline*, by means of control selection and tailoring. A trusted machine-readable representation of a canonical control set such as NIST SP 800-53 is a significant (and arguably indispensable) asset for any organization tasked with understanding and implementing it; the OSCAL catalog model supports this by providing a common set of rules for encoding this catalog (control set), like others, thereby promoting interoperability and enabling commodity tools.

Reviewer 2: Closing for now until significant rework is complete.

Since OSCAL is designed purposefully to represent such data sets (in a specific semantic domain, namely the [NIST Risk Management Framework](https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-37/rev-2/final) or RMF), the casting of this information into OSCAL encoding can be straightforward, economical and clean.

#### Control, ID and title

> This control has a number of high-level data elements, including a security control identifier ("AC-1"), a title ("ACCESS CONTROL POLICY AND PROCEDURES"), the control (text) itself, supplemental guidance, control enhancements (although not in this example), and references.

Reviewer 2: Discussed this when we met prior, this is now obsolete.

See the source code as currently available in [raw XML from Github](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/usnistgov/oscal-content/main/nist.gov/SP800-53/rev5/xml/NIST_SP-800-53_rev5_catalog.xml). The control is identified in code with tagging that looks *mainly* as follows, with slight simplifactions. Control AC-1 starts:

{{<highlight xml "nowrap=false" >}}
<control class="SP800-53" id="ac-1">
    <title>Policy and Procedures</title>
{{< / highlight >}}

- The control is assigned a class, "SP800-53". This serves as an indicator to a downstream processor of the control's origin (with respect to the catalog or catalog type), with implications for related expectations, including expectations in detail regarding how the control and its contents may be structured.

> - The control ID is "ac-1". All `id` values are unique within the document and serve for addressing and linking. The lexical form of the `id` is designed to be consistent with its formal (conventional) code or label, which is *also* encoded within the control (in this case, "AC-1"). While such regularities are normal and to be expected, this one is a feature of this data set, not a requirement of OSCAL generally.

Reviewer 2: Minor, non-blocking: are we still sticking with the terminology document instance? Also be more direct it is not syntactically required but still recommended and preferred?

```suggestion
- The control ID is "ac-1". All `id` values are unique within the document instance and serve for addressing and linking. The lexical form of the `id` is designed to be consistent with its formal (conventional) code or label, which is *also* encoded within the control (in this case, "AC-1"). OSCAL does not require it, but many data set owners benefit from the recommended approach, where lexical and formal control identifiers are consistent and regular in this way.
```

#### Parameters

The control continues with `<param>` elements. This is the first place where the electronic file definitively and explicitly captures information about the source data that is left implicit in in its published form (that is, as a document). In this case, the information captured regards options for control configuration (by users of the catalog) in detail, which will subsequently be reflected in the control text as rendered, but which are called out here as first-class objects so that OSCAL consumers can handle them in appropriate ways.

> A *parameter* in OSCAL (tagged as `<param>` in XML or, in JSON or YAML, as an object member of a `parameters` array) corresponds to and supports the construct called *controlled parameter value* (CPV) in NIST SP 800-53A, while not being limited exclusively to that use.

Reviewer 2: Minor, non-blocking: I quickly grepped 800-53A for this term CPV. Makes sense and I like it, but I didn't find where it is mentioned there and I didn't recall it. Is this just what we call it internally or it is expressly documented in the 800-53Ar5 publication?

*Note*: In this data, they appear with the controls in which they are used, but in OSCAL data, parameters may also be defined elsewhere, including at the group level or across a catalog, thus facilitating their consolidation and reuse.

*Note also*: for succinctness, the code sampled here shows only the first four of the parameters defined for AC-1 in the document (version) it was derived from.

{{<highlight xml "nowrap=false" >}}
<param id="ac-1_prm_1">

>     <prop name="aggregates" ns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/rmf"

Reviewer 2: Minor, non-blocking: should we talk about the addition of `ns` to properly identify and segment controls by data set owner/control framework more effectively? We added this pretty late in the game but something we might want to highlight here, or maybe better in the "Learn to Make a Catalog Tutorial" that is more involved? Either way, just food for thought. Would love your take on that.

        value="ac-01_odp.01"/>
    <prop name="aggregates" ns="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/rmf"
        value="ac-01_odp.02"/>
    <label>organization-defined personnel or roles</label>
</param>
<param id="ac-01_odp.01">
    <prop name="label" class="sp800-53a" value="AC-01_ODP[01]"/>
    <label>personnel or roles</label>
    <guideline>
        <p>personnel or roles to whom the access control policy is to be
        disseminated is/are defined;</p>
    </guideline>
</param>
<param id="ac-01_odp.02">
    <prop name="label" class="sp800-53a" value="AC-01_ODP[02]"/>
    <label>personnel or roles</label>
    <guideline>
        <p>personnel or roles to whom the access control procedures are
        to be disseminated is/are defined;</p>
    </guideline>
</param>
<param id="ac-01_odp.03">
    <prop name="alt-identifier" value="ac-1_prm_2"/>
    <prop name="label" class="sp800-53a" value="AC-01_ODP[03]"/>
    <select how-many="one-or-more">
        <choice>organization-level</choice>
        <choice>mission/business process-level</choice>
        <choice>system-level</choice>
    </select>
</param>

> [... params ac-01_odp.04 through ac-01_odp.08 ...]

Reviewer 2: Should we include this if the sample is already truncated and disjoint in the new structure introduced from this PR?

```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Discussed this when we met prior, this is now obsolete.

{{< / highlight >}}

`<param>` elements define parameter values for the control that permit (and may require) setting in context. Typically, a catalog will expose parameters where profiling applications are expected either to define appropriate values themselves (that is, values appropriate to a baseline) or to permit setting at higher levels of implementation (such as system plans implementing a baseline). These values are available for reference (and even display) in the language of the control as presented, using corresponding `<insert>` elements, as described in detail below.

> OSCAL parameters are worth special coverage as a topic in themselves. As shown here, they can and commonly do have internal structure and properties of their own, sometimes specific to a particular application, requirement or use case. For example, in this data set, `<prop>` elements are given to provide extra information -- `alt-identifier` values -- helping assure parameters' correspondences across versions of SP 800-53. Consumers of OSCAL content can determine where and how such information is useful to them, and ignore or discard it when it constitutes noise.

Reviewer 2: Minor, non-blocking: should we just open up an issue to document parameters with special coverage on its own page? I agree that it is a worthy topic, but definitely want OSCAL leads to confirm that and agree if it's a priority or not. 😅

{{<highlight xml "nowrap=false" >}}
<prop name="label" value="AC-1"/>
<prop name="label" class="sp800-53a" value="AC-01"/>
<prop name="sort-id" value="ac-01"/>
{{< / highlight >}}

In this representation of AC-1, three properties are given by the data publisher. Each of these properties may be fairly considered to be a "convenience value": for example, two properties provides data consumers with reliable values for a control label "as published" in different renditions of the catalog. An extra identifier is also provided for sorting. As shown here, `<prop>` elements can also be qualified by `class` to offer further distinctions from neighbor properties.

> In OSCAL, the values of properties must be atomic values, such as strings, numbers or dates, without Markdown (for example) or other kinds of formatting. To extend properties to provide for values with more complex object types represents a challenge to be met, because any representation of data at this level must be in a form as widely accessible as possible across the greatest range of consumers (languages, platforms, serialization formats, and information modeling and programming technologies and paradigms). To mitigate this limitation, where simple qualification by assigning name/value pairs is not enough, controls (and other structures) in OSCAL can also be extended using other generic elements such as `<link>` and `<part>`.

Reviewer 2: Isn't it technically within OSCAL `markup-multiline` datatype and just happens to overlap with Markdown when present in YAML, but still not considered Markdown? I understand this is a little in the weeds for a concepts page, but this can muddy the waters and lead to confusion later.

#### Links

Following any property sequence come any links proper to this control. Consistently with modern practice, only outbound links are encoded explicitly.

Like parameters and properties, `<link>` elements provide for explicit representation of data given implicitly in published sources. Here, this information is represented by the __Related Controls__ and __References__ sections of the control text. In each case, targets of the links form distinct classes of their own -- they are either cross-referenced controls or enhancements (also `<control>` elements in OSCAL), or references to bibliographic entries listed as back matter. These are distinguished by `rel` values permitting each to be resolved and handled correctly.

> On links, `href` follows the semantics of `href` as defined for HTML/HTTP by W3C. `rel` is constrained as an enumerated value by OSCAL.

Reviewer 2: Minor, non-blocking: maybe we add a link to W3C, [perhaps this](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/links.html#introduction-2)?

{{<highlight xml "nowrap=false" >}}
<link rel="reference" href="#27847491-5ce1-4f6a-a1e4-9e483782f0ef"/>
<link rel="reference" href="#c7ac44e8-10db-4b64-b2b9-9e32ec1efed0"/>
<link rel="reference" href="#08b07465-dbdc-48d6-8a0b-37279602ac16"/>
<link rel="reference" href="#cec037f3-8aba-4c97-84b4-4082f9e515d2"/>
<link rel="reference" href="#4c0ec2ee-a0d6-428a-9043-4504bc3ade6f"/>
<link rel="reference" href="#7f473f21-fdbf-4a6c-81a1-0ab95919609d"/>
<link rel="related" href="#ia-1"/>
<link rel="related" href="#pm-9"/>
<link rel="related" href="#pm-24"/>
<link rel="related" href="#ps-8"/>
<link rel="related" href="#si-12"/>
{{< / highlight >}}

> No rule in OSCAL prevents a link from targeting any resource or target whatsoever; but catalog authors can be expected to manage their links according to regimes appropriate to their catalogs. In the case of SP 800-53, internal links (from one control to another) are represented as __Related Controls__ in the formatted source. These are easily indicated via `href` fragment identifiers - `#ia-1` referencing the entity with `id` value `ia-1`, which of course happens to be control IA-1.

Reviewer 2: Minor, non-blocking: should we consider say there is no requirement in OSCAL that explicitly prevents ...? Since we will eventually add a construct `<rule>` later on but that will not be used to define this requirement, I feel that gets a little confusing post 1.2.0 publication release when rule docs will lead to questions on this bit.

```suggestion
No explicit requirement in the OSCAL specification that prevents a link from targeting any resource or target whatsoever; but catalog authors can be expected to manage their links according to regimes appropriate to their catalogs. In the case of SP 800-53, internal links (from one control to another) are represented as __Related Controls__ in the formatted source. These are easily indicated via `href` fragment identifiers - `#ia-1` referencing the entity with `id` value `ia-1`, which of course happens to be control IA-1.
```

Reviewer 2: Discussed this when we met prior, this is now obsolete.

> *References*, however (in contrast to related controls),  function as bibliographic citations, using a code for each reference given in the PDF source. In the OSCAL, the bibliographic items are collected and encoded in the catalog back matter (`<back-matter>`) as `<resource>` elements.

Reviewer 2: Minor, non-blocking: did you mean two spaces here?

```suggestion
*References*, however (in contrast to related controls), function as bibliographic citations, using a code for each reference given in the PDF source. In the OSCAL, the bibliographic items are collected and encoded in the catalog back matter (`<back-matter>`) as `<resource>` elements.
```

#### Parts

After the links come the constituent pieces or `parts` of the control, as `<part>` elements (in JSON or YAML, members of a `parts` array), representing the main text, subordinate text and any subordinate parts or associated information (aside from control enhancements, which are considered controls in themselves, as described below).

Like properties (`<prop>` elements) parts can be distinguished for semantic purposes by their names. Sets of names for known part types can be formalized at the level of either OSCAL or its application(s), or left informal for consumers and interchange partners to detect and respect as appropriate. Like parameters and controls, parts may also have properties and links of their own. In this data, `<prop>` elements are also used at the part level (that is, directly within `<part>`) to capture information sometimes relevant (to the part's rendition, to document and establish fidelity to upstream sources where it appears, or for other reasons). This can also be seen in other examples not shown here, such as the parts given in OSCAL SP 800-53 to describe control assessment objectives, methods and processes.

> `statement` is the name assigned to parts that capture the normative text of the control itself. In SP 800-53, some statement parts (control text) appear articulated into grouped and enumerated line items (such as here in AC-1); in others, a simple paragraph or paragraph sequence is given.

Reviewer 2: Minor, non-blocking: did we formalize the notion that part and statement are similarly organizational containers? I had never thought of it that way, and it kind of makes sense to me. I could be wrong, but personally feel it could cause confusion with our downstream practitioners and devs in the community.

Reviewer 2: Discussed this when we met prior, this is now obsolete.
